king.tool.export.PovrayExport.menuName = <export>
king.tool.export.DiveExport.menuName = <export>
# VRML and XML export are not maintained or complete...
king.tool.export.Vrml97Writer.menuName = <not shown>
king.tool.export.XknWriter.menuName = <not shown>
# KingLite (aka Hai-King) is no longer used (was for Palm Pilot / Java ME)
king.tool.export.KingLiteBinaryExport.menuName = <not shown>
king.tool.draw.LathePlugin.menuName = Kin editing
king.tool.draw.PointColorPlugin.menuName = Kin editing
king.tool.draw.SkylightPlugin.menuName = Kin editing
king.tool.movie.MoviePlugin.menuName = Kin editing
king.tool.image.KinImagePlugin.menuName = Specialty
king.tool.data_analysis.CrossWindowPickTool.menuName = Specialty
king.tool.data_analysis.AutoBondRotDataTool.menuName = Specialty
king.tool.docking.Dock3On3Tool.menuName = Kin editing
king.tool.docking.DockLsqTool.menuName = Kin editing
king.tool.docking.DockConnTool.menuName = Kin editing
king.tool.views.ViewpointPlugin.menuName = <main menu>
king.tool.views.ClipPlanesPlugin.menuName = Specialty
king.tool.rnaxtal.RNAMapTool.menuName = <not shown>
king.tool.rnaxtal.GuilloTool.menuName = <not shown>
king.tool.sequence.FastaTool.menuName = Specialty
king.tool.postkin.RecolorTool.menuName = Kin editing
king.tool.postkin.KinFudgerTool.menuName = Kin editing
king.tool.postkin.RamaTool.menuName = Specialty
king.tool.loops.LoopTool.menuName = Kin editing
king.tool.loops.LoopDockingTool.menuName = <not shown>
king.tool.loops.FramerTool.menuName = Specialty
king.tool.data_analysis.PlottingTool.menuName = Data analysis
king.tool.postkin.GeometryPlugin.menuName = Structural biology
king.tool.rnaxtal.RNAExtractTool.menuName = Specialty
king.tool.postkin.RMSDTool.menuName = Specialty
king.tool.postkin.ColorGrouperPlugin.menuName = Specialty
king.tool.loops.PatchGapPlugin.menuName = Structural biology
king.tool.postkin.KinimolPlugin.menuName = Specialty
king.tool.loops.LoopRmsdTool.menuName = Specialty
king.tool.data_analysis.HighDimSliderPlugin.menuName = Data analysis
king.tool.data_analysis.RdcPlayPlugin.menuName = Specialty
king.tool.vr.VRKinTool.menuName = Specialty
# king.tool.nmr.RdcVisTool.menuName = Specialty
king.tool.nmr.CoCenterTool.menuName = Kin editing
king.tool.export.RenderExport.menuName = <export>
king.tool.nmr.ParenTool.menuName = Specialty
