#LyX 1.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 220
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme pslatex
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Editing kinemages with KiNG
\layout Section*

What is KiNG?
\layout Standard

KiNG is a new kinemage viewer / editor that has many of Mage's core features
 and a few additional capabilities that have not yet made it into Mage.
 KiNG is the preferred online viewer for MolProbity, so you may have already
 used KiNG.
\layout Section*

Neat things to do with KiNG
\layout Standard

KiNG allows you to edit your kinemage in certain ways that would otherwise
 require hand modification with a text editor.
 A sampling of the available tools:
\layout Itemize

View electron density...
\layout Itemize

...and write out blocks of it in kinemage format!
\layout Itemize

Merge existing (sub)groups
\layout Itemize

Move lists from one (sub)group to another
\layout Itemize

Move subgroups from one group to another
\layout Itemize

Create new (empty) groups and subgroups
\layout Itemize

Move groups/subgroups/lists from one kinemage to another
\layout Itemize

Rearrange the order in which groups and subgroups appear
\layout Itemize

Translate, rotate, and scale entire groups/subgroups/lists
\layout Itemize

Change the widths of lines and the radii of balls and spheres
\layout Itemize

Create a single file that contains multiple kinemages
\layout Standard

Most of these tools can be accessed by loading your file into KiNG and selecting
 the Modify tab (above the list of on/off buttons).
 KiNG will then display a hierchical view of the contents of your kinemage.
 Navigate to the part to be modified, and choose an appropriate command
 from the 
\family typewriter 
Modify
\family default 
 menu.
 In particular, many different options can be altered using the 
\family typewriter 
Edit properties
\family default 
 command.
 Use 
\family typewriter 
Cut
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
Paste
\family default 
 to relocate and merge things, and use 
\family typewriter 
Move up
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
Move down
\family default 
 to change the order they appear in.
 To edit the properties of single points, select 
\family typewriter 
Edit properties
\family default 
 from the Toolbox and click on the point to be edited.
\layout Standard

To view electron density, open the Toolbox and choose the ED Map tool.
 Click the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Open map
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 button that appears and select an electron density map file.
 A new window will appear that allows you to control the extent, levels,
 and colors of the map.
 The map follows you as you recenter the view on different parts of the
 model; to record part of the map permanently, press 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Export to kinemage.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

To create one file that contains multiple kinemages, start KiNG and use
 the 
\family typewriter 
File | Open
\family default 
 command to open each individual kinemage, in the order in which you wish
 for them to appear in the final file.
 If you look in the drop box in the upper-righthand corner of the KiNG window,
 you should get a list of kinemages (Kinemage 1, Kinemage 2, 
\emph on 
etc.
\emph default 
) to choose from.
 If you made a mistake, select the kinemage to get rid of and choose 
\family typewriter 
File | Close\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
 (don't use 
\family typewriter 
File | Close all
\family default 
!).
 When only the desired kinemages remain open, choose 
\family typewriter 
File | Save as
\family default 
 to write all of them to disk.
 Make sure to give the file a new name --- KiNG is still under development
 and could write out a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

damaged
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 kinemage, so you don't want to overwrite your originals!
\layout Standard

There are a few other things that are possible in Mage, but may be easier
 in KiNG:
\layout Itemize

Rename and rearrange views (
\family typewriter 
Views | Edit saved views
\family default 
)
\layout Itemize

Make your kinemage display a white background, use realistic perspective,
 or draw all lines as thin by default (select the kinemage in the Modify
 pane and choose 
\family typewriter 
Edit properties
\family default 
).
\layout Section*

How to access KiNG
\layout Standard

Log in to one of the Linux machines in the Richardson lab (as user 
\family typewriter 
bch222
\family default 
).
 Either type 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

king
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 from the command prompt or click the big purple K on the button bar at
 the bottom of the screen.
 While you can test out these editing features using the online version
 of KiNG in MolProbity, you won't be able to save your modified file.
 This is due to a security restriction that web browsers place on Java applets,
 and there's no good way to get around it.
\layout Section*

Getting help with KiNG (and reporting bugs)
\layout Standard

Come see Ian Davis (my office is 208B Nanaline Duke, in the Richardson lab)
 or send me email at 
\bar under 
ian.davis@duke.edu
\bar default 
.
 Also, KiNG has a fairly comprehensive manual and tutorial that can be accessed
 from the 
\family typewriter 
Help
\family default 
 menu.
 Please, please, please report any problems you have in using KiNG.
 Even if the problem you describe isn't actually due to the software malfunction
ing, it gives me a clue that things could be redesigned and made easier
 to use!
\layout Section*

Getting KiNG for your own computer
\layout Standard

At the present time, we don't distribute KiNG publicly.
 However, it's written in Java and can run under Windows, Mac OS X, and
 Linux.
 If you'd like your own copy of KiNG, talk to Ian.
\the_end
